---
title: Gain compactness using Souslin spaces
math: true
tags: ["Measure Theory"]
---

In this post, I would like to share an idea that finally leads
to a breakthrough in my research work.
Even though this idea might be of too little importance,
I would appreciate it a lot if any of my readers could point out
that this idea has appeared long time ago somewhere.

Before my start, my main reference book
^[I share an [PDF copy](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1b9ooQLN8OkxPi9IrwIaqkEIfaRWyNXKk/view?usp=sharing)
of this book on Google Drive in case you might need.]
is the two volumes monograph
_Measure Theory_ by [V.I.Bogachev](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vladimir_Bogachev).
Any __cited propositions__ in the following are meant to be found in this book.

## Problem setting

Given a measure space $(X, \sigma)$,
typically the Borel measurable space for some topology space $(X, \tau)$,
i.e., $\sigma = \mathcal{B}(X):= \sigma(\tau)$,
we usually have different topologies available in the base
space $X$ for our use.
Especially, it is common that our space $X$ is a metric space of functions
of functionals, and we might have different metrics for this base space $X$.

The first question here is how to find a possible non-trivial
compact subset for a given measurable set $\Omega \subset X$.
The answer to this question is easy, recall that
a Borel measure $\mu$ on X is called a _Radon measure_ if for every $B$ in
$\mathcal{B}(X)$ and $\varepsilon > 0$,
there exists a compact set $K_\varepsilon \subset B$ such that
$|\mu|(B\setminus K_{\varepsilon})<\varepsilon$.
And it is quite frequently used that, stated as Theorem 7.1.7 in the book,
any finite Borel measure on a complete and separable space is Radon.
At this stage, we must choose a Borel measure $\mu$ which is actually
Radon and an $\varepsilon > 0$ to accomplish our goal.

Now we can enter our core problem.
Given a Borel measure $\mu$ and Borel set $B \subset X$ with respect
to a given topology $(X, \tau_1)$,
how could we get a non-empty compact subset of $B$ with respect to another
given topology $(X, \tau_2)$?
Regardless possible topological assumptions on $(X, \tau_1)$ or $(X, \tau_2)$,
there are two things to resolve if we want to apply the
previous Radon measure trick:
1. $\mu$ must be a Borel measure with respect to the topology $(X, \tau_2)$;
2. $B$ must be a Borel set with respect to the topology $(X, \tau_2)$.

Our hero today, the concept of Souslin spaces, will solve the problem
by giving mild conditions that assert the identity between
the two Borel $\sigma$-algebras generated by $(X, \tau_1)$ and $(X, \tau_2)$,
which are denoted by $\sigma_1$ and $\sigma_2$ here.
In other words, we shall use Souslin spaces to discuss that
under what conditions we will have $\sigma_1 := \sigma(\tau_1)$
equals to $\sigma_2 := \sigma(\tau_2)$.


## Souslin spaces ^[One can consult section 6.6 and section 6.7 in the book for a detailed understanding of this concept.]

The name Souslin might be written as [Suslin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikhail_Suslin),
which is the case on Wikipedia.
While Souslin was a research student of Luzin,
at the age of 22 or 23 ^[Souslin died at the age of 24,
comparing to the fact that Galois died at the age of 20
and Abel died at the age of 26.],
he found an error in an argument of Lebesgue
^[It is in the proof of Théorème XVIII in
his paper _Sur les fonctions représentables analytiquement_,
p.193, _Journal de mathématiques pures et appliquées 6e série_,
tome 1 (1905), p. 139-216.],
who believed he had proved that for any Borel set in $\mathbb{R}^{2}$,
the projection onto the real axis was also a Borel set.
It is clear that this discovery inspires nowadays definition of Souslin space.

### Definitions

<div class="definition">

A set in a Hausdorff space is called _Souslin_ if it is
the image of a complete separable metric space under a continuous mapping.
A _Souslin space_ is a Hausdorff space that is a Souslin set.
The empty set is Souslin as well.

</div>

Souslin sets are also called analytic sets.
The complement of a Souslin set in a Souslin space is
called co-Souslin or coanalytic.

This definition looks ordinary and less powerful as expected.
But as happened frequently in the domain of measure theory,
we also have an unexpected equivalent definition for it.
It is stated in Theorem 6.6.8 from the book that
every Souslin set in a Hausdorff space can be obtained
from closed sets by means of the $\mathcal{A}$-operation.
The rough idea is that $\mathcal{A}$-operation includes at least
countable unions and intersections.
We shall show this equivalence in the next section.

### Properties

Let's sketch the proofs of some interesting properties of the Souslin space.
To simplify our arguments, we introduce the concept of Polish spaces.

<div class="definition">

A topological space homeomorphic to a complete
separable metric space is called _Polish Space_.
The empty set is also included in the class of Polish spaces.

</div>

The representation of a Polish space as the continous image from
the _Baire space_ $\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$
^[The Baire space is homeomorphic to topological
subspace of irrationals on (0,1) using the continued fraction.],
which is endowed
with product topology of the discrete topology on $\mathbb{N}$,
is the starting point of classical descriptive set theory.
We can always find the spirit of its proof in the theory of Souslin space.
Let us define the $\mathcal{A}$-operation to reveal this idea.

<div class="definition">

Let $X$ be a nonempty set and let $\mathcal{E}$ be some class
of its subsets.
We say that we are given a Souslin scheme (or a table of
sets) $\{A_{n_0, \ldots , n_k}\}$ with values in $\mathcal{E}$ if,
to every finite sequence $(n_0, \ldots , n_k)$ of
natural numbers, there corresponds a set 
$A_{n_0,\ldots,n_k} \in \mathcal{E}$.
The $\mathcal{A}$-operation (or the Souslin operation) 
over the class $\mathcal{E}$ is a mapping that to every Souslin
scheme $\{A_{n_0,\ldots,n_k}\}$ with values in $\mathcal{E}$ associates the set
$$ A = \bigcup_{ (n_i) \in \mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N} }
\bigcap_{ k=0 }^ \infty A_{n_0,\ldots,n_k}. $$
The sets of this form are called $\mathcal{E}$-Souslin or
$\mathcal{E}$-analytic.

</div>

One can use the $\mathcal{A}$-operation to construct
the following continuous surjection.

<div class="theorem">

Every nonempty complete separable metric space is
the image of $\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$ under a continuous mapping.

</div>

<div class="proof">

Let us equip $\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$ with the metric
$$ \varrho(\alpha,\beta)=\sum_{j=0}^{\infty}2^{-j-1}\frac{|n_{j}-m_{j}|}
{|n_{j}-m_{j}|+1},\quad\alpha=(n_{j}),\,\beta=(m_{j}),$$
which gives rise to the topology of the Baire space.
We represent the
given space X in the form $X = \bigcup_{j = 0}^\infty E(j)$
where the sets $E(j)$ are closed (not necessarily disjoint) of diameter
less than $2^{-2}$.
By induction, for every $k$,
we find a closed set $E(n_0, \ldots , n_k)$
of diameter less than $2^{−k−2}$ with
$$ E(n_{0},\ldots,n_{k}) = \bigcup_{j=0}^{\infty}E(n_{0},\ldots,n_{k},j). $$
For every $\alpha = (n_i) \in \mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$,
the closed sets $E(n_0, . . . , n_k)$ are decreasing and
have diameters less than $2^{−k−2}$.
Hence, they shrink to a single point denoted
by $f(\alpha)$.
Note that $f(\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}) = X$.
Indeed, every point $x$ belongs to some
set $E(n_0)$, then to $E(n_0, n_1)$ and so on,
which yields an element $\alpha$ such that
$f(\alpha) = x$. 
In addition, $f$ is locally Lipschitzian.
If $\varrho(\alpha, \beta) < \frac{1}{4}$,
then there exists $k$ with $2^{−k−2} ≤ \varrho(\alpha, \beta) < 2^{−k−1}$.
Then $\alpha_i = \beta_i$ if $i ≤ k$.
Hence $f(\alpha)$ and $f(\beta)$ belong to $E(n_0, \ldots , n_k)$, whence
we obtain $\rho( f(\alpha), f(\beta) ) < 2^{−k−2} ≤ \varrho(\alpha, \beta)$,
where $\rho$ be the metric in X.
Thus, $f$ is continuous.

</div>

<div class="proposition">

Let $\mathcal{S}(X)$ denote the class of all Souslin sets in a topological space X, then
a. $\mathcal{S}(X)$ includes all open and closed subsets of $X$;
b. $\mathcal{S}(X)$ is closed with respect to the $\mathcal{A}$-operation;
c. Any element of $\mathcal{S}(X)$ can be written as the $\mathcal{A}$-operation
of closed subsets of $X$.

</div>

<div class="proof">

Pleas click to expand any of the following details if you are interested in.

<details>

<summary>Proof for (a):</summary>

We remark that any open or closed subsets of a Polish space is Polish.
In fact, to construct a metric on the open subset $X \setminus Y \subset X$
with $Y$ a closed subset of a given Polish metric space $(X, \varrho)$, we simply define
$$ \varrho_{0}(x,y)=\varrho(x,y)+\frac{|\mathrm{dist}(x,X\setminus Y)-\mathrm{dist}(y,X\setminus Y)|}
{|\mathrm{dist}(x,X\setminus Y)-\mathrm{dist}(y,X\setminus Y)|+1},$$
which turns out to be complete.

</details>

<details>

<summary>Proof for (b):</summary>

One can construct infinite product of Polish spaces to
show that $\mathcal{S}(X)$ is closed with respect to countable
union and intersection.
For the general case, we first lift a given Souslin scheme of
$\mathcal{S}(X)$ to a monotone disjoint Souslin scheme of
$\mathcal{S}(X \times \mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N})$.
A scheme $\{ A_{n_0, \ldots, n_k} \}$ is _monotone_
if $A_{n_0,\ldots,n_k} \subset A_{n_0,\ldots,n_{k-1}}$,
and it is _disjoint_ if $A_\alpha \cap A_\beta = \emptyset$ for
$\alpha \neq \beta \in \mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$.
We can trivialize the $\mathcal{A}$-operation for
monotone disjoint Souslin scheme $\{A_{n_0,\ldots,n_k}\}$
to countable unions and intersections
since for this scheme we have
$$  \bigcup_{ (n_i) \in \mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N} }
\bigcap_{k=0}^\infty A_{n_0,\ldots,n_k}
=  \bigcap_{k=0}^\infty
\bigcup_{ n_i \in \mathbb{N}}
A_{n_0,\ldots,n_k}. $$

For our proof, first notice that we can transform any scheme
to be monotone without changing the result of $\mathcal{A}$-operation
by re-defining 
$$ A_{n_0,\ldots, n_k} := A_{n_0} \cap A_{n_0, n_1} \cap \ldots
\cap A_{n_0, \ldots, n_k} .$$
To render a scheme $A$ disjoint, we define
$A^\prime_{n_0,\ldots,n_k} := A_{n_0,\ldots,n_k} \times C_{n_0, \ldots, n_k},$
where $C_{n_0, \ldots, n_k}$ is the set of sequences in $\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$
whose first $k+1$ element is $(n_0, \ldots, n_k)$.
Then the $\mathcal{A}$-operation gives us a Souslin set
in the space $X \times \mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$.
Finally, one can get the original $\mathcal{A}$-operation result by
projection.

</details>

<details>

<summary>Proof for (c):</summary>

Let a set $A$ be the image of the space $\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$
under a continuous mapping $f$. 
For every finite sequence $n_0, \ldots , n_k$,
we denote by $F_{n_0, \ldots ,n_k}$ the closure of $f(C_{n_0,\ldots,n_k})$,
where we define $C_{n_0,\ldots,n_k}$ as in the proof of (b):
$$ C_{n_{0},\ldots,n_{k}}=
\left\{(m_{i}) \in \mathbb{N}^{\mathbb{N}}
:\, (m_{0},\ldots,m_{k})=(n_{0},\ldots,n_{k}) \right\}.$$
One can then show that
$A = \bigcup_{(n_i) \in \mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}} \bigcap_{k=0}^\infty F_{n_0,\ldots,n_k}$
by noticing that $f((n_i)) = \bigcap_{k=0}^\infty F_{n_0,\ldots,n_k}$.

</details>

We thus finish the proof.
</div>

### Radon measure and Souslin space

In practice, it is necessary to know the following result,
stated as Theorem 7.4.3 in the book.

<div class="theorem">

If $X$ is a Souslin space, then every Borel measure
$\mu$ on $X$ is Radon.

</div>

### Theorems by Souslin or Lusin

After getting a bit acquaintance of Souslin spaces,
we now discuss several fondamental and useful results in this theory.

<div class="theorem">

(Lusin's Separation Theorem) Let $X$ be a Hausdorff space
and let $A,B \subset X$ be two disjoint Souslin sets.
Then there is a Borel set $C \subset X$ separating $A$ from $B$.

</div>

<div class="proof">

We can express $A$ and $B$ as the
continuous images of $\mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$ under $f$ and $g$.
If we cannot separate $A$ and $B$ with Borel sets,
it must be that we cannot separate two Souslin subsets,
say $f(C_{n_0}) \subset A$ and $g(C_{m_0}) \subset B$,
with Borel sets,
where $C_i \subset \mathbb{N}^\mathbb{N}$ is the set of 
sequences starting with $i \in \mathbb{N}$.
Continue this argument applying to the two chosen subsets
in each step,
we will finally get a contradiction that we cannot
even separate two points in a Hausdorff space.

</div>


<div class="corollary">

Suppose that the complement of a Souslin set $A$ in
a Hausdorff space $X$ is Souslin.
Then $A$ is a Borel set.

</div>

<div class="theorem">

Let $(X, \tau)$ be a Souslin space.
If $\tau^\prime \subset \tau$ is another topology on $X$,
then $(X, \tau)$ and $(X, \tau^\prime)$ have the same Borel set.

</div>

<div class="proof">

Let $f: (X, \tau) \rightarrow (X, \tau^\prime)$ be the continuous
identity map that sends $x \in X$ to $x$.
For $B$ a Borel set in $(X, \tau)$, $B = f(B)$ is a Souslin set
in $(X, \tau^\prime)$ since $f$ is continuous
and $B$, being Souslin in $(X, \tau)$, is the continuous image of
a Polish space.
For the same reason, $X \setminus B$ is a Souslin set for $(X, \tau^\prime)$,
which implies that $B$ is Borel set for $(X, \tau^\prime)$.

</div>


## Exemplar usage in my research

Let $(E,d)$ be a Polish space,
then the Wasserstein-$2$ space $\mathcal{W}_2(E)$ 
is also a Polish space.
Fix a reference measure $\mu$ on $(E, d)$.
Define the set $\mathbb{B}: = \mathcal{W}_2(E) \cap P_{\operatorname{ac}}(E)$
of absolutely continuous probability measures
in $\mathcal{W}_2(E)$ with respect to $\mu$.
Via the identification $f \cdot \mu \in \mathbb{B} \leftrightarrow f$,
we consider $\mathbb{B}$ as a subset of
the unit sphere of $L^1(\mu)$.

We can consider $\mathbb{B}$
with different topologies.
We denote by $(\mathbb{B}, \tau_w)$ the
topology space with respect to the weak convergence
of probability measures,
denote by $(\mathbb{B}, \tau_W)$ the topological subspace
of $(\mathcal{W}_2(M), W)$, denote by $(\mathbb{B}, \tau)$
the weak topology space induced by the dual space $L^\infty(\mu)$
of $L^1(\mu)$ and denote by $(\mathbb{B}, \tau_L)$ the
topological subspace of the Lebesgue space $L^1(\mu)$.
From these definitions, we always have
$\tau_w \subset \tau \subset \tau_L$ and $\tau_w \subset \tau_W$.
Now it is a good exercise to show that

<div class="theorem">

The four
topology spaces $(\mathbb{B}, \tau_w)$, $(\mathbb{B}, \tau_W)$, $(\mathbb{B}, \tau)$
and $(\mathbb{B}, \tau_L)$ have the same Borel sets.

In particular, if $\mathbb{P} \in \mathcal{W}_2(\mathcal{W}_2(E))$
gives mass to the set $\mathbb{B}$,
then it gives mass to a compact subset of $(\mathbb{B}, \tau_L)$.

</div>
